README.md, before:

# Blueprint

![ci status](https://github.com/henningway/blueprint/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)
![bundle size](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/@henningway/blueprint)
![npm version](https://badgen.net/npm/v/@henningway/blueprint)

Declarative object conversion and creation for JavaScript.

## Contents

-   [Install](#install)
-   [Usage](#usage)
-   [Features](#features)
-   [Example](#example)
-   [API](#api)
    -   [Classes/Functions](#classesfunctions)
    -   [Descriptors](#descriptors)
    -   [Modifiers](#modifiers)
-   [License](#license)

## Install

```
$ npm install @henningway/blueprint
```

## Usage

```javascript
import { blueprint, $String } from 'blueprint';

const bookBlueprint = blueprint({ title: $String.default('A Book') });

bookBlueprint.make(); // { title: 'A Book' }
bookBlueprint.make({ title: 'The Name of the Wind' }); // { title: 'The Name of the Wind' }
```

## Features

**All Objects**

> Specify mappings between formats with an object (that looks like the target format). In goes an object, out comes an object.

**Declarative**

> Use descriptors like `$String`, `$Number.maybe`, `$Many($String)`. You can provide alternate keys, transformation functions, defaults, and more - without sacrificing legibility.

**Nesting**

> Nest blueprints in various ways to build complex structures without sweating.

**Null Objects**

> Use Blueprints to easily generate null objects with empty default values.

**Simple Validation**

> Missing keys or type mismatches result in early failure.

**Extensible**

> Writing custom descriptors is a piece of cake.

**Light**

> No dependencies, small size.

---

⚠️**Disclaimer:** While descriptors `$String`, `$Many` etc. might look like a type system, blueprint is not intended to be a replacement for Typescript by any means.

## Example

Create blueprint:

```javascript
import { blueprint, $String, $Number, $Boolean, $Many } from 'blueprint';

const bookBlueprint = blueprint({
    title: $String,
    author: {
        name: $String,
        homepage: $String
    },
    pages: $Number('length'),
    genres: $Many($String.after((genre) => genre.charAt(0).toUpperCase() + genre.slice(1))),
    inStock: $Boolean.default(false),
    price: $Number.optional,
    isHardCover: $Boolean('coverType').before((type) => type === 'hardcover')
});
```

Convert object to desired format:

```javascript
bookBlueprint.make({
    title: 'The Name of the Wind',
    author: {
        name: 'Patrick Rothfuss',
        homepage: 'patrickrothfuss.com'
    },
    length: 662,
    genres: ['fantasy', 'fiction'],
    coverType: 'hardcover'
});
```

The result is what you'd expect:

```javascript
{
    title: 'The Name of the Wind',
    author: {
        name: 'Patrick Rothfuss',
        homepage: 'patrickrothfuss.com'
    },
    pages: 662,
    genres: ['Fantasy', 'Fiction'],
    inStock: false,
    isHardCover: true
}
```

Or create a null object by omitting the original object in `bookBlueprint.make()`:

```javascript
{
    title: '',
    author: {
        name: '',
        homepage: ''
    },
    pages: 0,
    genres: [],
    inStock: false,
    price: 0,
    isHardCover: false
}
```

## API

### Classes/Functions

#### `new Blueprint({ ...specification })` | `blueprint({ ...specification })`

Creates an instance of the `Blueprint` class that serves as a model for the conversion and creation of objects of the same structure.

Each value of `specification` should be one of [ [descriptor](#descriptors) | object | blueprint | factory function ]. Note that when you pass a nested object, blueprint or factory function, then you cannot chain modifiers to them, since they are only available to instances of the Descriptor class. In this case, wrap it with `$One(...)` and you are ready to go.

#### `Blueprint: make({ ...raw })`

Factory method that creates a new object from the blueprint as a transformation of the given raw object. Note that the input object is not modified.

If any of the keys in the specification is missing from the raw object then a `MissingKeyError` will be thrown (you can change this with [modifiers](#modifiers)).

When `raw` is omitted (or provided as empty object) a [null object](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_object_pattern) with empty default values will be created. Descriptors are signified with a `$` sign.

Refer to the [Descriptors](#descriptor) section to learn how each one behaves with regard to conversion and default values.

#### `factory({ ...specification })`

This serves as a convenient replacement for `(raw) => blueprint({ ...specification }).make(raw)`.

### Descriptors

Descriptors characterize properties of the target object. They start with a `$` to avoid collision with JavaScript primitives (`string`, `number`, `boolean` and their uppercase wrappers). Descriptors serve two purposes: One is to provide a human-readable format to describe the resulting objects, and the other is to provide typical functionality of transformations.

There are two types:

-   basic: `$Any`, `$String`, `$Number`, `$Boolean`, `$Date`
-   higher-order: `$One`, `$Many`

Both share common parameters, but higher-order ones have one extra:

-   `nested` (only higher-order descriptors): A nested descriptor, object, blueprint or factory function.
-   `key`: They key in the object to be converted. Essentially maps one key to another. Defaults to the key the descriptor is attached to in the blueprint specification.

The distinction between basic descriptors is small: Except for `$Any` all of them check incoming values for their corresponding type and in case of null object creation result in values of their type. `$Any` does not perform any validation and results in a `null` value during null object creation.

As shown in the examples above, thanks to some shifty Proxy magic you can use descriptors entirely without parameters and brackets.

#### `$Any(key)`

Passes input values through without validation. Results in `null` during null object creation.

#### `$String(key)`

Checks against type `string` during validation. Results in `''` during null object creation.

#### `$Number(key)`

Checks against type `number` during validation. Results in `0` during null object creation.

#### `$Boolean(key)`

Checks against type `boolean` during validation. Results in `false` during null object creation.

#### `$Date(key)`

In case of the input value being a date the value is passed through. Otherwise creates a new one with `new Date(input)`. Results in the date created by `new Date('1970-01-01')` (the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time)) during null object creation.

#### `$One(nested, key)`

The purpose of `$One` is to allow nesting primitive objects, other blueprints, and factory functions inside blueprints and still provide a key and chained modifiers to them.

All of these are equivalent:

-   Object: `author: $One({ name: $String }, 'writtenBy').maybe`
-   Blueprint: `author: $One(blueprint({ name: $String }), 'writtenBy').maybe`
-   Factory (library function): `author: $One(factory({ name: $String }), 'writtenBy').maybe`
-   Factory (custom function): `author: $One((raw) => ({ author: { name: raw.writtenBy })).maybe`

If you don't need the added functionality provided by descriptors, you can of course go without `$One`: `author: { name: $String }`.

The result during null object creation depends on the nested specification.

#### `$Many(nested, key)`

`$Many` allows converting arrays. `nested` is applied to each of the input array's values. Results in `[]` during null object creation.

### Modifiers

Modifiers can be chained to descriptors to alter their behaviour.

#### `.maybe`

When missing from the raw object (key not present OR value is `null` OR value is `undefined`), instead of causing a `MissingKeyError`, the property is `null` in the converted object. This applies to null object creation as well.

#### `.optional`

Similar to `.maybe`, but instead of producing `null`, the property is omitted entirely from the converted object. This applies to null object creation as well.

#### `.default(value)`

Similar to `.maybe`, but instead of producing `null`, the given default value is used. This applies to null object creation as well.

#### `.before((value) => { ...; return value; })`

Allows transformation of input values. The transformation function receives a single value and should return the modified value. The transformation is applied before validation.

Also, in case of higher order descriptors, the transformation is applied before the nested specification takes effect. Note that the callback will receive the outer datastructure.

If instead you want to transform each value in a nested datastructure, use `.before` on the nested descriptor like this:

`$Many($String.before((value) => { ... }))`

Use `.before` over `.after` when you want to transform a value of a different type into the intended type without receiving a `ValidationError`.

#### `.after(callback)`

Same as `.before`, but is applied after validation and conversion of nested values. When in doubt use this over `.before`.

## License

[MIT](LICENSE) © 2021 Henning Schindler

Commit message:

add note on project status to README

README.md, after:

# Blueprint

![ci status](https://github.com/henningway/blueprint/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)
![bundle size](https://badgen.net/bundlephobia/minzip/@henningway/blueprint)
![npm version](https://badgen.net/npm/v/@henningway/blueprint)

> NOTE: Project is work in progress and might forever be.

Declarative object conversion and creation for JavaScript.

## Contents

-   [Install](#install)
-   [Usage](#usage)
-   [Features](#features)
-   [Example](#example)
-   [API](#api)
    -   [Classes/Functions](#classesfunctions)
    -   [Descriptors](#descriptors)
    -   [Modifiers](#modifiers)
-   [License](#license)

## Install

```
$ npm install @henningway/blueprint
```

## Usage

```javascript
import { blueprint, $String } from 'blueprint';

const bookBlueprint = blueprint({ title: $String.default('A Book') });

bookBlueprint.make(); // { title: 'A Book' }
bookBlueprint.make({ title: 'The Name of the Wind' }); // { title: 'The Name of the Wind' }
```

## Features

**All Objects**

> Specify mappings between formats with an object (that looks like the target format). In goes an object, out comes an object.

**Declarative**

> Use descriptors like `$String`, `$Number.maybe`, `$Many($String)`. You can provide alternate keys, transformation functions, defaults, and more - without sacrificing legibility.

**Nesting**

> Nest blueprints in various ways to build complex structures without sweating.

**Null Objects**

> Use Blueprints to easily generate null objects with empty default values.

**Simple Validation**

> Missing keys or type mismatches result in early failure.

**Extensible**

> Writing custom descriptors is a piece of cake.

**Light**

> No dependencies, small size.

---

⚠️**Disclaimer:** While descriptors `$String`, `$Many` etc. might look like a type system, blueprint is not intended to be a replacement for Typescript by any means.

## Example

Create blueprint:

```javascript
import { blueprint, $String, $Number, $Boolean, $Many } from 'blueprint';

const bookBlueprint = blueprint({
    title: $String,
    author: {
        name: $String,
        homepage: $String
    },
    pages: $Number('length'),
    genres: $Many($String.after((genre) => genre.charAt(0).toUpperCase() + genre.slice(1))),
    inStock: $Boolean.default(false),
    price: $Number.optional,
    isHardCover: $Boolean('coverType').before((type) => type === 'hardcover')
});
```

Convert object to desired format:

```javascript
bookBlueprint.make({
    title: 'The Name of the Wind',
    author: {
        name: 'Patrick Rothfuss',
        homepage: 'patrickrothfuss.com'
    },
    length: 662,
    genres: ['fantasy', 'fiction'],
    coverType: 'hardcover'
});
```

The result is what you'd expect:

```javascript
{
    title: 'The Name of the Wind',
    author: {
        name: 'Patrick Rothfuss',
        homepage: 'patrickrothfuss.com'
    },
    pages: 662,
    genres: ['Fantasy', 'Fiction'],
    inStock: false,
    isHardCover: true
}
```

Or create a null object by omitting the original object in `bookBlueprint.make()`:

```javascript
{
    title: '',
    author: {
        name: '',
        homepage: ''
    },
    pages: 0,
    genres: [],
    inStock: false,
    price: 0,
    isHardCover: false
}
```

## API

### Classes/Functions

#### `new Blueprint({ ...specification })` | `blueprint({ ...specification })`

Creates an instance of the `Blueprint` class that serves as a model for the conversion and creation of objects of the same structure.

Each value of `specification` should be one of [ [descriptor](#descriptors) | object | blueprint | factory function ]. Note that when you pass a nested object, blueprint or factory function, then you cannot chain modifiers to them, since they are only available to instances of the Descriptor class. In this case, wrap it with `$One(...)` and you are ready to go.

#### `Blueprint: make({ ...raw })`

Factory method that creates a new object from the blueprint as a transformation of the given raw object. Note that the input object is not modified.

If any of the keys in the specification is missing from the raw object then a `MissingKeyError` will be thrown (you can change this with [modifiers](#modifiers)).

When `raw` is omitted (or provided as empty object) a [null object](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_object_pattern) with empty default values will be created. Descriptors are signified with a `$` sign.

Refer to the [Descriptors](#descriptor) section to learn how each one behaves with regard to conversion and default values.

#### `factory({ ...specification })`

This serves as a convenient replacement for `(raw) => blueprint({ ...specification }).make(raw)`.

### Descriptors

Descriptors characterize properties of the target object. They start with a `$` to avoid collision with JavaScript primitives (`string`, `number`, `boolean` and their uppercase wrappers). Descriptors serve two purposes: One is to provide a human-readable format to describe the resulting objects, and the other is to provide typical functionality of transformations.

There are two types:

-   basic: `$Any`, `$String`, `$Number`, `$Boolean`, `$Date`
-   higher-order: `$One`, `$Many`

Both share common parameters, but higher-order ones have one extra:

-   `nested` (only higher-order descriptors): A nested descriptor, object, blueprint or factory function.
-   `key`: They key in the object to be converted. Essentially maps one key to another. Defaults to the key the descriptor is attached to in the blueprint specification.

The distinction between basic descriptors is small: Except for `$Any` all of them check incoming values for their corresponding type and in case of null object creation result in values of their type. `$Any` does not perform any validation and results in a `null` value during null object creation.

As shown in the examples above, thanks to some shifty Proxy magic you can use descriptors entirely without parameters and brackets.

#### `$Any(key)`

Passes input values through without validation. Results in `null` during null object creation.

#### `$String(key)`

Checks against type `string` during validation. Results in `''` during null object creation.

#### `$Number(key)`

Checks against type `number` during validation. Results in `0` during null object creation.

#### `$Boolean(key)`

Checks against type `boolean` during validation. Results in `false` during null object creation.

#### `$Date(key)`

In case of the input value being a date the value is passed through. Otherwise creates a new one with `new Date(input)`. Results in the date created by `new Date('1970-01-01')` (the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time)) during null object creation.

#### `$One(nested, key)`

The purpose of `$One` is to allow nesting primitive objects, other blueprints, and factory functions inside blueprints and still provide a key and chained modifiers to them.

All of these are equivalent:

-   Object: `author: $One({ name: $String }, 'writtenBy').maybe`
-   Blueprint: `author: $One(blueprint({ name: $String }), 'writtenBy').maybe`
-   Factory (library function): `author: $One(factory({ name: $String }), 'writtenBy').maybe`
-   Factory (custom function): `author: $One((raw) => ({ author: { name: raw.writtenBy })).maybe`

If you don't need the added functionality provided by descriptors, you can of course go without `$One`: `author: { name: $String }`.

The result during null object creation depends on the nested specification.

#### `$Many(nested, key)`

`$Many` allows converting arrays. `nested` is applied to each of the input array's values. Results in `[]` during null object creation.

### Modifiers

Modifiers can be chained to descriptors to alter their behaviour.

#### `.maybe`

When missing from the raw object (key not present OR value is `null` OR value is `undefined`), instead of causing a `MissingKeyError`, the property is `null` in the converted object. This applies to null object creation as well.

#### `.optional`

Similar to `.maybe`, but instead of producing `null`, the property is omitted entirely from the converted object. This applies to null object creation as well.

#### `.default(value)`

Similar to `.maybe`, but instead of producing `null`, the given default value is used. This applies to null object creation as well.

#### `.before((value) => { ...; return value; })`

Allows transformation of input values. The transformation function receives a single value and should return the modified value. The transformation is applied before validation.

Also, in case of higher order descriptors, the transformation is applied before the nested specification takes effect. Note that the callback will receive the outer datastructure.

If instead you want to transform each value in a nested datastructure, use `.before` on the nested descriptor like this:

`$Many($String.before((value) => { ... }))`

Use `.before` over `.after` when you want to transform a value of a different type into the intended type without receiving a `ValidationError`.

#### `.after(callback)`

Same as `.before`, but is applied after validation and conversion of nested values. When in doubt use this over `.before`.

## License

[MIT](LICENSE) © 2021 Henning Schindler
